about.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
main_nav: true
---

![alt text]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/profile-placeholder.gif "Profile Picture"){:.profile}

Centrarium is a custom theme for Jekyll, made by [Ben Centra][bencentra] for his own blog. He'd be humbled if you liked it enough to use it as well! Installation and configuration instructions can be found in the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/bencentra/centrarium).

This page is a good place to write about yourself, your project, your product, or whatever it is your site is for. You can replace the image above, or you can get rid of it entirely. 

You can find out more info about customizing your Jekyll theme, as well as basic Jekyll usage documentation at [jekyllrb.com](http://jekyllrb.com/). And you can find the source code for Jekyll at [github.com/jekyll/jekyll](https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll)

[centrarium]: https://github.com/bencentra/centrarium
[bencentra]: http://bencentra.com
[jekyll]: https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll

Commit message:

updating about me and social media accounts visible

about.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
main_nav: true
---

Hello world! This is my initial attempt at curating a website to share what I can do with the world. I developed with webpage using GitHub as a means of practicing and showcasing several different skillsets–namely my writing skills (via blog posts) and data analysis (via research projects). Bear with me as I continue to learn and please connect to discuss anything I share that catches your eye.

A bit about me: I am a research scientist whose interests lie in understanding how sleep and exercise modulate our health and well-being. 

Yours in Science, 

Tom Gooding, PhD, ATC, CSCS


![alt text]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/profile_photo.png "Profile Picture"){:.profile}

Centrarium is a custom theme for Jekyll, made by [Ben Centra][bencentra] for his own blog. He'd be humbled if you liked it enough to use it as well! Installation and configuration instructions can be found in the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/bencentra/centrarium).

This page is a good place to write about yourself, your project, your product, or whatever it is your site is for. You can replace the image above, or you can get rid of it entirely. 

You can find out more info about customizing your Jekyll theme, as well as basic Jekyll usage documentation at [jekyllrb.com](http://jekyllrb.com/). And you can find the source code for Jekyll at [github.com/jekyll/jekyll](https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll)

# [centrarium]: https://github.com/bencentra/centrarium
# [bencentra]: http://bencentra.com
# [jekyll]: https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll
