---
layout: post
title:  "Why dogs are good for your health."
date:   2025-04-15 08:00:00
author: Tom Gooding
categories: Physical Activity
tags: Exercise, Dogs
---

# Why are dogs good for our health?

Dogs are man's best friend; it's a tail as old as time. (see what I did there?)

There is a plethora of reasons for having a dog. I would venture these benefits also hold up for other pets as well, though I view other pets as money which could be used toward having a dog. Some of the more obvious reasons include:

1. Companionship. They're always there for you.
2. Affection. In general, pets are all about providing unconditional love.
3. Entertainment. They are a joy to be around and love to play.

Beyond these three general 'perks,' there are specific benefits to having a dog from a health perspective, which I discuss below.

## Bottom line up front

1. Dog ownership may increase physical activity levels.
2. Having a dog can improve your immune system (Hygiene hypothesis).
3. Dogs may work as a 'free' pregnancy test.

## How having a dog improves your physical activity levels

The 2018 United States Physical Activity Guidelines recommend at least 150 minutes/week of moderate-intensity or 75 minutes/week of vigorous-intensity of physical activity for substantial benefits. Despite this, 80% of US adults are not meeting these guidelines, contributing to the significant trends in NCD statistics. Given the prevalence of physical inactivity, there exists the call for creative public health messaging and programming aimed at promoting physical activity across the nation for all age groups.

 Promoting dog ownership could potentially be a solution to reducing physical inactivity in the US. Dog ownership is a common place around the world where 50% of United States, 39% of Australian, and 27% of UK households own a dog.**[5]** While some may see owning a pet as an increased burden of responsibility, others can find it quite enjoyable. Dogs have been considered “man’s best friend” for 15,000+ years working side-by-side with humans aiding in tasks such as hunting, herding, and protection, as well as fulfilling social roles such as companionship.**[6,7]**
 
 Furthermore, dog ownership has been associated with lower causes of all-cause mortality and cardiovascular mortality, particularly in dog owners with previous incidence of coronary episodes.**[8]** Given the prevalence of NCDs such as CVD in the US, we may be able to find solutions to promote physical activity in our home lifestyles via dog ownership, particularly in times such as these (i.e. COVID-19 global pandemic) that prevent us from seeking out recreational facilities. 

>Testing how to indent within indents
>> Does this change? <p>

triple spaces it is.

>>>Yes
>>Now, how do we get out of the triple indent? <p>

### Observational Data Supporting Improving Physical Activity through Dog Ownership

Relating to dog ownership and all-cause mortality, and particularly cardiovascular mortality, a recent meta-analysis covering 70 years of research has shown positive association. Dog ownership was associated with 24% risk reduction for all-cause mortality (RR=0.76, 95%CI, 0.67-0.86) which was even more pronounced in dog owners with a prior coronary event (RR=.35, 95%CI, 0.17-0.69, I2 0%.) Cardiovascular mortality specifically conferred a 31% risk reduction for CV death (RR=0.69, 95%CI, 0.67-0.71, I2 5.1%.) Despite these strong associations, only 10 studies totaling 3.8 million participants were included in the meta-analysis.**[8]**

The majority of research aimed at examining relationships between physical activity and dog ownership has been largely observational in nature and tends to target specific populations from youth to the elderly. In older adults, it has been found that dog ownership has been associated with lower BMI, fewer ADL limitations, fewer doctor visits, and more frequent moderate9,10 and/or vigorous exercise.10 Dog ownership has been associated with increased use of built neighborhood environment such as local parks. Veitch et al examined PA levels associated with park-going dog owners vs. non-dog owners. Results showed that dog owners were more likely to visit parks (OR=2.71, 95%CI 1.99-3.7) and more likely to engage in moderate-intensity other than sitting (RR=2.30, 95%CI 1.69-3.15) versus non-dog owners (NDO.) Interestingly, children who owned a dog were more likely to frequently visit parks but were also found to engage in less physical activity while at the park (OR= -9.22, 95%CI= -16.74- -1.70).11 This last finding surprised researchers who initially hypothesized that owning a dog would cause children more likely to engage in moderate-intensity PA and spend more time physically active compared to NDO children. In the “Play Spaces and Environment for Children’s Physical Activity” (PLAYCE), a 3-year cross-sectional observational study of children aged 2-5 years (n=2119) examined the social-emotional development in young children. It was hypothesized that children from dog-owning (DO) families would have better social-emotional development than non-down owning (NDO) families associated with higher levels of active play and walking with the dog. The parent-reported strengths and difficulties questionnaire (SDQ) was used to determine social-emotional development, and physical activity was determined by frequency of active play and walking (with vs. without a dog) per week. Compared to NDO families, DO preschoolers had reduced odds of having a poor total SDQ score (OR=.77, 95% CI: 0.59 to 0.99) and reduced odds of having conduct problems or peer problems (OR=.70, 95% CI:  0.54 to .90; OR=.60, 95% CI: .46 to .79, respectively), when adjusted for age, sex, sleep, screen time, and parent education. Within the DO families, preschoolers who walked with the family dog at least once per week had reduced odds of having poor total SDQ sores, compared to those who didn’t (OR=.64, 95% CI: 0.42 to 0.96) along with having increased odds of having an “above average” score on prosocial behaviors (OR=1.45, 95% CI: 1.02 to 2.08) compared DO families that did not engage in physical activity with the dog.12 One limitation with self-reported physical activity is that these studies are subjective to recall bias and that people tend to overestimate their levels of physical activity.

In Japan, Koohsari et al13 used accelerometers to objectively quantify physical activity levels amongst 693 participants (mean age 52 years) including 119 dog owners. Mean wearing time was 15.4 (SD=1.5) hours/day for an average of 7 (SD=.9) days. It was found that total sedentary time, duration, and number of long (30+ min) sedentary bouts were all lower (p<.05) compared to NDO participants, indicating that dog ownership reduces sedentary time amongst dog owners.13 It was also found that DO subjects were more likely to engage in more minutes of light-intensity physical activity (19.41, 95% CI 1.31 to 37.51). Despite these findings, no differences in moderate-vigorous physical activities were found between DO and NDO groups. These results using accelerometers to objectively measure PA differ from previous studies which, through self-reported PA measures, haves shown that dog owners were more likely 55-77% higher odd of achieving sufficient levels of physical activity,14 particularly in later adulthood (>40 years old), compared to non-owners.15 Similar research in the United Kingdom has examined physical activity levels with amongst whole family units that own a dog vs. those that do not and have found that compared to NDOs, DOs are more likely to report walking for recreation (OR=14.35, 95%CI=5.77-35.79, p<.001), and walk longer (RR=1.39, 95% CI=1.27-5.91, p<.001) and were more likely to meet the recommended PA guidelines (OR=4.10, 95%CI=2.05-8.19, p<.001). If dog walkers “briskly walk” with their pets for 30 minutes a day five days a week, they meet these PA guidelines.16 It is worth mentioning however that while these findings are positive, brisk walking for a given individual most likely fails to improve aspects such as cardiorespiratory fitness, based on the lower intensity associated with walking, compared to more strenuous forms of exercise such as jogging or cycling.

### Intervention Studies supporting Physical Activity Through Dog Ownership

There are a small number of randomized control trials and similar intervention-based studies examining the relationship between dog ownership and PA levels. Morrison et al,17 Byers et al,18 and Schneider et al,19 have all attempted to provide more causative evidence using randomized control trials of dog ownership and physical activity levels. Using accelerometers and self-reported questionnaires to quantify PA, none of the studies showed any significant differences in PA amongst dog-owners compared to controls (NDO) in the ~10-12-week follow-up windows following their intervention programs. Building off of these studies’ lack of significant findings, Richards et al aimed to identify potential longer-term benefits in the dogs, physical activity, and walking (Dogs PAW) intervention program with a 1-year follow up period in dog owners only (n=49.) Subjects were allocated to either a control group or intervention group. The control group only received an initial email of the current PA guidelines, where the intervention group received twice-weekly e-mail messages (designed through the social cognitive theory model) for 4 weeks, and once weekly for 8 weeks. All subjects received a health screening at study onset and at the end of follow up. Physical activity was assessed using the self-reported International Physical Activity questionnaire20 (IPAQ.) Immediately postintervention the intervention group reported an average of 79.3min (SD=53.6) min/week of dog walking compared to 19.4 (SD=23.9) in the control (p<.10.) at 3, 6, and 12 months these trends continued (no significant difference found at 9 months, p>.10; likely due to seasonality of reporting in February) with average walking time for the intervention group being 80.0 (SD=34.4) minutes/week compared to the controls’ 18.6 (SD=21.4) minutes/week (p<.05.) Across all time points, the intervention group accumulated ~1 hour more per week of dog walking than the controls. Additionally, the intervention group at 12 months showed significant increase in minutes of vigorous PA (M=131.2, SD=237.5) vs. the control group (M=104.3, SD=156.0; p<.05). Taken together, this is promising data that PA messaging and interventions aimed at dog owners may be successful towards increasing physical activity amongst previously inactive dog owners yet fails to show differences among dog owners vs. non-dog owners. Furthermore, there were no significant health differences between either group throughout the study. One study has previously attempted use of a “loaner’ dog program to improve adherence towards walking habits amongst socioeconomically disadvantaged persons who at study onset did not currently own a dog. Participants engaged in the 52-week arm showed 72% adherence and significant weight loss (14.4lbs, p=.013 Wilcoxon signed rank test) and those in the 26-week arm had an adherence rate of 52% with mean weight loss of 5lbs (p=.29, Wilcoxon signed rank test.)21 the most commonly cited reason for adherence was that “they need us to” in reference to the dogs themselves. Previous qualitative research has supported the notion of needs of a “significant other” (i.e. dog) being motivation for owners to engage in PA.22 Future intervention-based studies aimed at dog owners with larger sample sizes, or studies using dog ownership as the intervention itself, might find similar improvements to physical activity levels if follow-up periods are of sufficient length and power. 

### Limitations and barriers of dog walking and PA

Research above has shown that evidence continues to improve the associations between dog ownership and higher levels of PA, though the physical activity tends to be light-moderate and is generally more associative that causal in nature. Several barriers and limitations exist that may prevent dog ownership from exhibiting higher levels of PA. Neighborhood built environment is crucial when considering walkability and the likelihood of taking a dog on a walk near home. Dog owners report that availability & quality of sidewalks, safety, and lighting, and attractive parks influence walking behavior23,24 with those residing in less walkable neighborhoods being having lower odds of walking their dog and vice versa.25 These findings also related to dog-specific features such as off-leash areas and dog-waste bins. Perceived dog behavior, such as aggressiveness towards others, or poor dog etiquette in public settings also have been shown to deter owners from walking their dogs.26 Other potential barriers might include differences in activity levels required for different dog ages and breeds (e.g. English bulldogs who are known for lethargy vs. highly energetic working breeds like shepherds.) Lastly, another limitation regarding these types of studies that are largely cross-sectional would be the issue of self-selection bias between owner and neighborhood. Dog owners might seek out these specific types of neighborhoods with characteristics that will facilitate their preference for dog walking.27 With all of this in mind, a major limitation of the cumulative the data is that it tends to infer association rather than causation regarding dog ownership and physical activity trends, based on Bradford Hill criteria.28 Current and future studies aimed at specifically providing interventions, in the form of randomized control trials, will shed more light on the exact relationship towards dog ownership and physical activity. 

### Concluding Remarks

Physical activity is a complex health behavior, and no single determinant can predict or explain PA adoption and maintenance. While dog ownership may seem to be a positive risk factor towards improving physically active lifestyles, evidence largely comes from observational studies and is only one piece of the puzzle towards improving physical activity and the associated health outcomes. Causal evidence is limited given the small number of intervention studies that have successfully explored this concept and found significant results. Nevertheless, based on more recent research from the past decade, owning a dog seems to:

1. Influence light-moderate levels of physical activity, mostly in the form of walking. This evidence is largely associative rather than causative in nature and not without mixed findings. Furthermore, though some positive markers of health have been found in dog owners such as improved BMI, through weight loss, and improved social-emotional development amongst preschoolers, higher levels of physical activity, studies largely failed to show higher levels of vigorous PA and were mixed regarding higher levels of moderate PA, compared to non-dog owners. 

2. Interventions and messaging aimed at improving PA among physically inactive dog owners has been shown to be successful with good adherence and results long-term (>12-months.)21,29 This knowledge may provide groundwork for more effective policies and messaging aimed at promoting more physical activity lifestyles to reduce chronic diseases such as CVD as supported by recent reviews30 and meta-analyses8 of the literature, particularly given the fact that nearly half of Americans own a dog.5 Though the evidence points towards dogs having a slight improvement on light-moderate physical activity levels, this is still a step in the right direction and if nothing else, has minimal health risks associated and allows dog owners a loving life companion. 

All in all, future research might suggest that an effective strategy towards improving physical activity may be quite literally lying at our feet.

## How dogs can improve our overall immune system (Hygiene hypothesis)

## Dogs can sniff drugs AND pregnancy (allegedly)
